Add history sync docs (#100)
xmtp/docs-xmtp-org: docs/pages/inboxes/history-sync.md

# Enable history sync for apps built with XMTP

Enable the history sync feature to give your users a way to sync decrypted historical data from an existing app installation to a new app installation.

This historical data includes:

- Conversations
- Conversation messages
- Consent state

> History sync enables your users pick up conversations where they left off, regardless of the app installation they use. All they need is an existing app installation to provide the data.

Author: Do we want to say something specific about how this helps with lost devices? I have one device with Converse installed and device sync is enabled. I lose the device -- can I get a new device, install Converse and use device sync to restore my inbox?

> History sync enables your users pick up conversations where they left off, regardless of the app installation they use. All they need is an existing app installation to provide the data.

Author: Do we want to say something specific about how this helps with lost devices? I have one device with Converse installed and device sync is enabled. I lose the device -- can I get a new device, install Converse and use device sync to restore my inbox?

Reviewer: Unfortunately in its current state it doesn't help with this. One thing I'd like to do in the future is be able to export backups that are encrypted with a password for future import.

History sync is enabled by default. When [creating a client](/inboxes/build-inbox#create-an-xmtp-client), the `historySyncUrl` client option is dynamically set to a default history sync server URL based on your `env` client option setting.

- When `env` is set to `dev`, the `historySyncUrl` is set to `https://message-history.dev.ephemera.network/`
- When `env` is set to `production`, the `historySyncUrl` is set to `https://message-history.production.ephemera.network`

These default servers are managed and operated by [Ephemera](https://ephemerahq.com/), a steward of the development and adoption of XMTP.

You can choose to [run your own server](https://github.com/xmtp/xmtp-message-history-server) and set the `historySyncUrl` to your server's URL.

## Manually request syncs

While history sync runs automatically, you can manually request syncs, if needed.

### Sync history

Use this method to sync conversation, message, and consent state history.

:::code-group

```jsx [Browser]
await client.syncHistory();
```

```jsx [Node]
code sample needed
```

```jsx [React Native]
code sample needed
```

```kotlin [Kotlin]
code sample needed
```

```swift [Swift]
code sample needed
```

:::

> 

Author: Added sync consent and sync messages sections based on Naomi's comment.

### Sync consent

Use this method to sync consent state history.

:::code-group

```jsx [Browser]
code sample needed
```

```jsx [Node]
code sample needed
```

```jsx [React Native]
code sample needed
```

```kotlin [Kotlin]
code sample needed
```

```swift [Swift]
code sample needed
```

:::

### Sync messages

Use this method to sync message history.

:::code-group

```jsx [Browser]
code sample needed
```

```jsx [Node]
code sample needed
```

```jsx [React Native]
code sample needed
```

```kotlin [Kotlin]
code sample needed
```

```swift [Swift]
code sample needed
```

:::

## How history sync works

> When your app initializes an XMTP client and a `historySyncUrl` client option is present, history sync automatically triggers an initial sync request, pulling all message history into the new app installation and merging it with the existing app installations in the sync group.

Author: Is "message history" OK here? Do we want to say "historical data" instead so that it includes all of the data types listed above? Or is it really just message history?

Reviewer: I would call it something more generic like "Conversation State", since this also includes consent, and probably more in the future.

History syncs are accomplished using these components:

- Sync group
- Sync worker
- History server

### Sync group

A sync group is a special [Messaging Layer Security](/protocol/specs) group that includes all of the user’s devices. The sync group is used to send serialized sync messages across the user's devices. The sync group is filtered out of most queries by default so they don’t appear in the user’s inbox.

### Sync worker

A sync worker is a spawned background worker that listens for sync events, and processes them accordingly. This worker:

- Emits and updates consent
- Creates and consumes archive payloads for and from other devices
- Keeps preferences synced across devices

### History server

A history server acts as a bucket that holds encrypted sync payloads. The URL location of these payloads and the password (cipher encryption key) to decrypt these payloads is sent over the sync group for the recipient to decrypt.

## FAQ

### A user logged into a new app installation and doesn't see their conversations. What's going on?

> The history sync feature uses a [sync worker](#sync-worker) that runs every 30 minutes to add any new app installations to a user's existing conversations. It may take up to 30 minutes for all of a user's conversations to appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We currently have a debounce feature that checks for new installations once every 30 minutes. We have an [open issue](https://github.com/xmtp/libxmtp/issues/1309) to fix this and make the groups appear almost instantly. If you can't wait up to 30 minutes for those groups to sync, send a message on the old device, and this will get around the timeout for now.
```

> You can give users a way to call sync conversations to enable them to get their conversations instantly from a pre-existing and online app installation.

Author: Do we need a "Sync conversations" section above as well - in addition to Sync history, Sync Consent, and Sync messages?

Reviewer: Conversations and Messages are synced together.

> You can give users a way to call sync conversations to enable them to get their conversations instantly from a pre-existing and online app installation.

Author: Regarding: "pre-existing and online app installation"

I'm using "pre-existing" to indicate that there must have been at least one app installation in existence before the app installation requesting the sync

I'm using "online" because Dakota used it in his source information. <3 Can I ask - do we use "online" to mean just that - that it is connected to the internet? Just making sure I get it! LOL

Reviewer: Yes, "online" is fine I think. :) Just need an instance of libxmtp active and connected to receive request messages.

### A user logged into a new app installation and sees their conversations, but no messages. What's going on?

> Ensure that you've initiated a call to sync messages and that you've opened a pre-existing and online app installation to receive the sync and begin the syncing process.

Author: Can I ask - what do we mean by "opened"? Does this mean the end user must open the other app installation - to approve the sync request? With a UX like this, for example? https://www.figma.com/design/PS0IW8vs03uKhQkydPa2GE/v3?node-id=377-2878&t=gAn09xBxAlJWsBN5-4

Reviewer: There's no approval - it happens automatically. By "opened" it means the old installation must be online to receive the sync request, process, compress, and encrypt the payload, upload the payload to the history server, and send a sync reply message to the new installation.

### I called a sync method (messages, consent state, or conversations), but nothing is happening. What's going on?

> After requesting a sync for one app installation, you must open a pre-existing and online app installation to receive the sync and begin the syncing process.

Reviewer: Maye we should add another FAQ

- When should I call for a manual sync
A: If for some reason the automatic sync didn't work, and the user wants to force a new sync. Ideally this would be an option in the app's settings under sync with an option like "Force Sync Now", indicating that most of the time the library makes a best effort by itself to stay in sync automatically.
